250 PART 3  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820
The Capitalist Commonwealth
What did republicanism mean for economic life? In 
early-nineteenth-century Ame rica, it mea nt private 
property, ma rket exch ange, individual opportunity, 
and activist governments. Throughout the nation, and 
especiall
y in the Northeast, republican state legislatures 
embraced a “neomercantilist” system of government-
assisted economic development. And it worked. Begin-
ning a round 1800,  t he a verage per capita income 
of Americans increased by m ore t han 1 p ercent a 
year — more than 30 percent in a single g en eration.
Banks, Manufacturing, and Markets
America was “a Nation of Merchants,” a British visitor 
reported from Philadelphia in 1798, “keen in the pur-
suit of wealth in all the various modes of acquiring it.” 
Acquire it they did, making spectacular profi ts as the 
wars of the French Revolution and Napoleon (1793–
1815) crippled European firms. Merchants John Jacob 
Astor and Robert Oliver became the nation’s first mil-
lionaires. After working for an Irish-ow n ed linen firm 
in Baltimore, Oliver struck out on his own, achieving 
affluence by t rading West I ndian sugar and coffee. 
Astor, who migrated from Ger many to New York in 
1784, began by selling dry-goods in west ern New York 
and became wealthy by carrying furs from the Pacific 
Northwest to China and investing in New York City 
real estate (Thinking Like a Historian, p. 252). 
Banking and Credit  T o fi nance t heir ventures, 
Oliver, Astor, a nd other me rchants needed capital, 
from ei ther their own savings or loans. Before the 
Revolution, farmers relied on government-sponsored 
land banks for loans, wh
ile merchants arranged part-
nerships or obtained credit from British s uppliers. 
Then, in 1781, Philadelphia merchants persuaded the 
Confederation Congress to charter the Bank of No rth 
America, and traders in Boston and New York soon 
founded similar institutions that raised funds and lent 
them out. “Our monied capital has so much increased 
from the Introductio n of Banks, & the Circulation of 
the Funds,” Philadelphia merchant William Bingham 
boasted in 1791,  “that t he Necessity of S oliciting 
Credits from England will no longer exist.”
That same year, Federalists in Co n gress chartered 
the Bank of the United States to issue notes and make 
commercial loans (Chapter 7, p. 218). By 1805,  the 
bank had branches in eight seaport cities, profits that 
averaged a handsome 8 percent ann ually, and clients 
with easy access to capital. As t rader Jesse At water 
noted, “the foundations of our [merchant] houses are 
laid in bank paper.” 
However, Jeffersonians attack ed t he bank as a n 
unco
nstitutional expansion of federal power. Moreover, 
they claimed it promoted “a con solidated, energetic 
government supported by public creditors, specula-
tors, a nd other insidio u s me n.” When t he bank’s 
twenty-year charter expired in 1811, the Jeffersonian 
Republican–dominated Congress refused to renew it. 
A Cloth Merchant, 1789 
Originally a prosperous storekeeper in New Milford, 
Connecticut, Elijah Boar
dman (1760–1832) eventually 
became a U.S. senator. Like other American traders dur-
ing the 1780s, he imported huge quantities of cloth from 
Britain. When the wars of the 1790s cut off trade, some 
merchants ﬁnanced the domestic production of textiles. 
Others, including Boardman, turned to land speculation. 
In 1795, he joined the Connecticut Land Company and 
bought huge tracts in Connecticut’s Western Reserve, 
including the present towns of Medina, Palmyra, and 
Boardman, Ohio. Ralph Earl painted this portrait in 1789. 
© The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Image Source: Art Resource/NY.

 CHAPTER 8  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820 251
Merchants, artisans, and farmers quickly persuaded 
state legislatures to charter banks — in Pennsylvania, 
no fewer than 41. By 1816, when Congress (now run by 
National Republicans) chartered a new natio nal bank 
(known as the Second Bank of the United States), there 
were 246 state-chartered banks with tens of thousands 
of stockholders and $68 million in banknotes in circu-
lation. These state banks were often shady operatio ns 
that issued notes without adequate specie reserves, 
made loans to insiders, and lent generously to farmers 
buying overpriced land. 
Dubious banking policies helped br in g on the Panic 
of 1819 (just as they caused the financial crisis of 2008), 
but broader forces were equally important. As t he 
Napoleonic Wars en ded in 1815,  Americans sharply 
increased th eir consumption of English woolen and 
cotton goods. However, in 1818, farmers and planters 
faced an abr
upt 30 percent drop in world agricultural 
prices. The price of raw cotton in South Carolina fell 
from 34 to 15 cents a pound, and as Br i tain closed the 
West Indies to American trade, wheat prices plum-
meted as well. As farmers’ income declined, they could 
not pay debts owed to stores and banks, many of which 
went bankrupt. “A  d e ep shadow has pass ed over our 
land,” lamented one New Yorker, as land prices dropped 
by 50 p ercent. The panic gave Americ ans their first 
taste of a bu siness cycle, the periodic boom and bust 
inherent to an unregulat ed ma rket economy.
Rural Manufacturing The Pa nic of 1819 devastated 
artisans and farmers who sold goods in regional or 
national markets. Before 1800, many artisans worked 
part-time a nd bartered t heir handicrafts locally. A 
French traveler in Ma ssa chusetts found many “men 
who are both cultivators and artisans,” while in Lan-
caster, Pennsylvania, clockmaker John Hoff exchanged 
The China Trade 
Following the Revolution, New England merchants traded actively with the major Asian manufacturing 
centers of China and India. In this painting by George Chinnery (1774–1852), the American ﬂag ﬂies 
pr
ominently, alongside other national banners, in front of the warehouse district in Canton (modern 
Guangzhou). There, merchants exchanged bundles of American furs for cargoes of Chinese tea, silks, 
and porcelain plates, cups, and serving dishes. 
© Peabody Essex Museum, Salem, Massachusetts, USA/The 
Bridgeman Art Library.

252
The Entrepreneur and 
the Community
THINKING LIKE  
A HISTORIAN
Americans of the early republic believed that with hard work and virtue, even 
the lowliest of white men might rise to economic and political respectability, if 
not prominence. In the Revolutionary generation, Benjamin Franklin, born into 
a large and impoverished Boston family, had become a successful businessman 
and an international celebrity. Franklin’s success reﬂected the optimism that 
laboring men felt when contemplating the new nation’s seemingly boundless 
opportunity. 
1. Banner of the Society of Pewterers of the City of 
New York, carried in the Federal Procession, July 
23, 1788, celebrating the ratification of the U.S. 
Constitution. The ribbon at top right reads “The 
Federal Plan Most Solid & Secure/Americans Their 
Freedom Will Endure/All Art Shall Flourish in 
Columbia’s Land/And All her Sons Join as One 
Social Band.”
Franklin’s aphorism “Early to bed and early to rise, 
makes a man healthy wealthy and wise,” Astor 
wrote:
The man who makes it the habit of his life to go to bed at 
nine o’clock, usually gets rich and is always reliable. Of 
course, going to bed does not make him rich — I merely 
mean that such a man will in all probabi lit y be up early 
in the morning and do a big day’s work . . . good habits 
in America make any man rich.
3. Anonymous, “A Working Man’s Recollections of 
America,” Knight’s Penny Magazine, 1846. A cabi-
netmaker penned this account after returning to 
England following an unsuccessful stint seeking 
success in New York. 
I was a cabinet-maker by trade, and one of the many 
who, between the years 1825–35, expatriated themselves 
in countless thousands, drawn by the promise of fair 
wages for faithful work, and driven by the scanty remu-
neratio
n offered to unceasing toil at home. . . . On landing 
in New York I made up my mind to lose none of the 
advantages it uttered by want of diligence on my part. 
Dur
ing the first two years I took but one holiday. . . . In 
summer we began work at six; at eight took half an hour 
for breakfast, and then worked till twelve, when one an 
hour for dinner; a fter which w e kept on till six, seven, 
or eight. . . . A relative who arrived from England held 
out to me bright prospects of advantages to be realized 
by the employment of a little capital, combi ned with a 
removal to some inland town. I sold off nearly the whole 
of our moveables . . . [and committed all my savings to 
this enterprise. However,] our scheme . . . completely 
failed, and I had no resou rces but my industry and 
chest of tools to meet the impending difficulties.
4. Diary entry by Philip Hone, March 29, 1848. 
Philip Hone (1780–1851), a conservative Whig, 
was a successful merchant and entrepreneur 
and mayor of New York City from 1826 to 1827. 
Source: © Collection of the New York Historical Society, USA/The Bridgeman Art 
Library.
2. John Jacob Astor quoted in Elbert Hubbard, Little 
Journeys to the Homes of Great Business Men, 
1909. John Jacob Astor’s (1763–1848) story is a 
parable of American entrepreneurial triumph. 
Arriving in America in 1783 from Germany, Astor 
worked in the fur industry treating pelts and, 
with capital borrowed from his brother, started 
up a musical instrument shop and fur business 
in 1786. Over the next three decades, Astor’s 
American Fur Company prospered by trading 
furs in China, making Astor America’s ﬁrst mil-
lionaire. Apparently inﬂuenced by Benjamin 

 253
ANALYZING THE EVIDENCE
1. What does the Pewterer’s Banner (source 1) suggest 
about personal and by extension national success in the 
post-Revolutionary era? What can you infer about arti-
san entrepreneurs in the new republic from this source?
2. According to John Jacob Astor (source 2) and the cabi-
netmaker (source 3), what traits are important in work? 
Based on the sources included here, do you agree with 
Astor that good habits make any man rich? Why or 
why not?
3. Sources 2, 4, and 5 all deal with John Jacob Astor. What 
do these sources suggest about the road to wealth in 
America? 
4. Compare and contrast Hone’s view of Astor (source 4) 
with that of the Herald’s editorial (source 5). Then apply 
the Herald’s critique to contemporary entrepreneurs 
such as Bill Gates of Microsoft or Steve Jobs of Apple. 
Are their fortunes also the product, in part, of “the 
industry of the community”? 
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
John Jacob Astor initially made money by trading furs in 
local and then in international markets. Next, he specu-
lated in land in booming cities. Finally, he became a rentier, 
crafting long-term property leases that guaranteed wealth 
to future generations of his family. Using the material in 
Chapter 8, explain how a pewterer or a cabinetmaker might 
follow a somewhat similar path to wealth in the market 
economy of nineteenth-century America. Noting also the 
statement “All her Sons Join as One Social Band” (source 1), 
explain why other Americans were critical of the rise of such 
ambitious capitalist entrepreneurs. 
bought forty, twenty and ten and five years ago, have 
all increased in value entirely by the industry of the 
citizens of New York . . . half of his immense estate, 
in its actual value, has accr ued to him by the industry 
of the community.
Sources: (2) Elbert Hubbard, Little Journeys to the Homes of Great Business Men (New 
York: Wm. H. Wise & Co., 1916), 201; (3) Knight’s Penny Magazine, Vol. 1 (London: 
Charles Knight & Co., 1846), 97, 107, 108; (4) Philip Hone, The Diary of Philip 
Hone, 1828–1851, Vol. 2 (New York: Dodd, Mead and Company, 1889), 347–348; 
(5) Gust
avus Myers, History of the Great American Fortunes, Vol. 1 (Chicago: 
Charles H. Kerr & Company, 1910), 199–200.
Hone’s marvelous diary (1828–1851) records the 
changing character of New York City, as well as 
his contempt for Jacksonian Democracy and its 
Irish immigrant supporters.
John Jacob Astor died this morning, at nine o’clock, in 
the eighty-fifth year of his age . . . and left reluctantly 
his unbounded wealth. His property is estimated at 
$20,000,000, some judicious persons say $30,000,000; 
but, a
t any rate, he was the richest man in the United 
States in productive and valuable property; and this 
immense, gigantic fortune was the fruit of his own 
labor, unerring sagacity, and far-s ee ing penetration. 
He came to this country at twenty years of age; 
penniless, friendless, without inheritance, without 
education . . . but with a determination to be rich, 
and ability to carr y  it into effect. His capital consisted 
of a few trifling musical instruments, which he got 
from his brother, George Astor, in London, a dealer 
in music. . . . The fur trade was the ph ilo sopher’s stone 
of this modem Croesus; beaver-skins and musk-rats 
furnished the oil for the supply of Aladdin’s lamp. His 
traffic was the shipment of furs to China, where they 
brought immense pr ic es, for he monopolized the 
business; and the return cargoes of teas, silks, and 
rich productions of China brought further large 
profits. . . . My brother and I found in Mr. Astor a 
valuable customer. . . . All he tou ched turned to gold.  
5. Editorial in the New York Herald, April 5, 1848. 
John Jacob Astor’s will included a bequest of 
$400,000 for the establishment of what became 
the New York Public Library. This editorial ques-
tioned whether this relatively meager bequest 
adequately repaid residents. 
If we had been an associate of John Jacob Astor the first 
idea that we should have put into his head would have 
been that one-half of his immense property — ten million 
at least — b elonged to the people of the city of New Yor k. 
During the last fifty years of the life of John Jacob Astor, 
his property has been augmented and increased in the 
value by the aggregate intelligence, industry, enterprise 
and commerce of New Yor k, fully to the amount of one-
half its value. The farms and lots of ground which he 

254 PART 3  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820
his clocks for a dining table, a b edstead, and labor on 
his small farm. Then various artisans — s hipbuilders in 
seacoast t owns, ironworkers in Pe nnsylvania a nd 
Maryland, clockmakers in Con necticut, and shoemak-
ers in Ma
ssachusetts — exp anded their output and sold 
their products in wider markets. 
American entrepreneurs drov e this exp ansion of 
rural manufacturing. Beginning in the 1790s,  enter-
prising me rc h ants bought raw 
materials, hired farm families to 
process t hem, a nd di stributed 
the finished manufactures. “Straw 
hats and Bonnets are manufac-
tured by many families,” a Maine 
census-taker noted in the 1810s. 
Merc
hants shipped rural manu-
factures — shoes, brooms, a nd 
palm-leaf hats as well as cup s, 
baking pans, a nd other t in utensils — to st ores in 
seaport cities. New E ngland peddlers, wh o quickly 
acquired repute as h ard-bargaining “Y ankees,” sold 
them throughout the rural South. 
New technology initially played only a minor role 
in producing this boom in consumer goods. Take the 
cas
e of te xtile production. During t he 1780s,  New 
England and Middle Atlantic merchants built water-
powered mills to run machines that combed wool — 
and later cotton — in to long strands. However, until the 
1810s, they used
 the household-based outwork system 
for the next steps: farm women and children spun the 
machine-combed st rands into t hread a nd yarn on 
foot-driven spinning wheels, and men in other ho use-
holds used foot-powered looms to weave the yarn into 
cloth. In 1820, more than 12,000 household workers 
labored full-time weaving woolen cloth, which water-
powered f ullin g mill s then pounded flat, giving the 
cloth a smooth finish. By then, the transfer of textile 
production to factories was gaining speed; the number 
of water-driven cotton spindles soared fr o m 8,000 in 
1809 to 333,000 in 1817.
The Yankee Peddler, c. 1830 
Even in 1830, many Americans lived too far from a market town to go there regularly to buy goods. Instead, 
they pur
chased their tinware, clocks, textiles, and other manufactures from peddlers, often from New 
England, who traveled far and wide in small horse-drawn vans like the one visible through the doorway. 
Collection IBM Corporation, Armonk, New York.
TRACE CHANGE 
OVER TIME 
How did govern-
ments, banks, and 
merchants expand 
American commerce and 
manufacturing between 
1780 and 1820?

 CHAPTER 8  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820 255
The growth of manufacturing offered farm families 
new opportunities — and new risks. Ambitious New 
England farmers swi tched from subsistence crops of 
wheat and potatoes to raising livestoc k.  They sold meat, 
butter, and cheese to city markets and cattle hides to 
the booming shoe industry. “Along the whole road 
from Boston, we sa w women e ngaged in ma king 
cheese,” a P olish t raveler reported. Ot her families 
raised
 sheep and sold raw wool to textile manufactur-
ers. Processing these raw materials brought new jobs 
and income to stagnating farming towns. In 1792, 
Concord, Massachusetts, had one slaughterho use and 
five small tanneries; a decade later, the town boasted 
eleven slaughterhouses and six large tanneries. 
As the rural economy churned out more goods, it 
altered the environment. Foul odors fr o m stockyards 
and ta nning pits wafted over Concord a nd other 
leather-producing towns. Nor was that all. Tanners cut 
down thousands of acres of hemlock trees, using the 
bark to process stiff cow hides into pl i able leather. More 
trees fell to the ax to create pasturelands for huge herds 
of livestock — dairy cows, cattle, and especially sheep. 
By 1850, most of the ancient forests in southern New 
England and e
astern New York were gone: “The hills 
had been stripped of their timber,” New York’s Catskill 
Messenger reported, “so as to present their huge, rocky 
projections.” Moreover, scores of textile millda ms dot-
ted New England’s rivers, altering their flow and pre-
venting fish — already severely depleted from decades 
of overfishing — fro m reaching upriver s pawning 
grounds. Even as the income of farmers rose, the qual-
ity of their natural env
ironment declined.
In the new capitalist-driven market economy, rural 
parents and their children worked longer and harder. 
They made yarn
, hats, and brooms during the winter 
and returned to their regular farming chores during 
the warmer seasons. More important, these farm fami-
lies now dep ended on t heir wage labo r  or market 
sales to purchase the textiles, shoes, and hats they had 
once made for themselves. The new productive system 
made families and communities more efficient and 
prosperous — and more dep endent on a market they 
co
uld not control.
New Transportation Systems  The e xpansion of 
the market depended on improvements in transporta-
tion, where governments also played a crucial role. 
Between 1793 and 1812, the Massachusetts legislature 
granted charters to more than one hu n dred private 
turnpike corporations. These charters gave the compa-
nies special legal status and often included monopoly 
rights to a t ransportation route. Pennsylvania issued 
fifty-five charters, including one t o t he L ancaster 
Turnpike Company, which built a 65-mile graded and 
graveled toll road to Philadelphia. The road quickly 
boosted t he regional e conomy. A lthough t urnpike 
investors received only about “three percent annually,” 
Henr
y Clay estimated, s ociety as a whole “actually 
reap[ed] fifteen or twenty percent.” A f arm woman 
agreed: “The turnpike is finished and we can now go to 
town at all times and in all weather.” New tur npik es 
soon connected dozens of inland market centers to 
seaport cities.
Water transport was even quicker and cheaper, so 
state governments and private entrepreneurs dredged 
shallow rivers and co n structed canals to bypass water-
falls and rapids. For their part, farmers in Kentucky and 
Tennessee and in southern Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois 
settled near the Ohio River and its many tri butaries, so 
they could easily get goods to market. Similarly, specu-
lators hoping to capitalize on the expansion of com-
merce bought up property in the cities along the banks 
of ma j or rivers: Cincinnati, Louisville, Chattanooga, 
and St. Louis. Farmers and merchants built barges to 
carry cotton, g rain, and meat d ownstream to New 
Orleans, which by 1815 was exporting about $5 million 
in agricultural products yearly . 
Public Enterprise: 
The Commonwealth System
Legislative charters for banks, turnpikes, and canal 
companies reflected t he ideology of me rcantilism: 
government-assisted economic development. Just as 
Parliament had used t he Navigation A cts t o s pu r  
British prosperity, so American legislatures en acted 
laws “of great public utility” to increase the “common 
wealth.” These stat utes gen erally t ook t he form of 
special charters that bestowed legal pr ivileges, such as 
the power of eminent domain, that allowed turnpike, 
bridge, and canal corporations to force the sale of pri-
vately owned land along their routes. State legislatures 
also aided capital-intensive flou r millers and tex tile 
manufacturers, who flooded adjacent farmland as they 
built dams to power their water-driven machinery. In 
Massachusetts, the Mill Dam A ct of 1795 depriv ed 
farmers of their traditio nal common-law right to stop 
the flooding and forced them to accept “fair com-
pensation” for their lost acreage. Judges approved this 
state-ordered s hift in property 
rights. “The esta bl ishment of a 
great mill-power for manufactur-
ing purposes,” J ustice Lem uel 
Shaw intoned, was “one of t he 
great industrial pursuits of t he 
commonwealth.”
UNDERSTAND 
POINTS OF VIEW
Did state mercantilism (the 
grant of privileges and 
charters) embody repub-
lican ideology or violate it?

256 PART 3  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820
Critics condemned t he legal privileges given to 
private enterprises as “Scheme[s] of an evident anti-
republican tendency,” as some “freeholder citizens” in 
Putney, Vermont, put it. Such grants to business cor-
poratio n s, they argued, violated the “equal rights” of 
citizens and infringed on the sovereignty of the gov-
ernments. “Whatever power is given to a corporation, 
is just so much power taken fr o m the State,” argued a 
Pennsylvanian. Nonetheless, judges in state courts, fol-
lowing t he lead of John Marshall’s Supreme Court 
(Chapter 7 ), consistently upheld corporate charters 
and grants of eminent domain to pr ivate transporta-
tion companies. “The opening of good and easy inter-
nal communications is one of the highest duties of 
government,” declared a New Jersey judge.
State mercantilism soon spre ad beyond transporta-
tion. Following Jefferson’s embargo of 1807, which cut 
off goods and credit from Europe, the New England 
states awarded charters to two hundred iron-mining, 
textile-manufacturing, and banking companies, while 
Pennsylvania granted more than eleven hundred. By 
1820, state governments had created a republican po li t-
ical economy: a Commonwealth System that funneled 
state aid to private businesses whose projects would 
improve the general welfare.
Toward a Democratic 
Republican Culture
After independence, many Americans in the northern 
states embraced a democratic republicanism that cele-
brated political equality and social mobility. These citi-
zens, primarily members of the emerging middle class, 
redefined the nature of the famil
y and of education by 
View of Cincinnati, by John Caspar Wild, c. 1835 
Thanks to its location on the Ohio River (a tributary of the Mississippi), Cincinnati quickly became one of the 
major pr
ocessing centers for grain and hogs in the trans-Appalachian west. By the 1820s, passenger 
steamboats and freight barges connected the city with Pittsburgh to the north and the ocean port of New 
Orleans far to the south. 
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, M. and M. Karolik Collection.

 CHAPTER 8  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820 257
seeking egalitarian marriages and affectionate ways of 
rearing their children.
Opportunity and Equality — 
for White Men
Between 1780 a nd 1820,  hundreds of well-educated 
visitors agreed that the American social order was dif-
ferent from that of Europe. In his famous Letters from 
an American Farmer  (1782), F rench-born essa yist 
J. Hector St. Jean de Crèvecoeur wr o te that European 
society was composed “of g reat lords who possess 
everything, and of a herd of people who have nothing.” 
By contrast, the United States h ad “no aristocratical 
families, no co ur ts, no kings, no bishops.”
The absence of a hereditary aristocracy encouraged 
Americans to condemn inherited social privilege and 
to extol legal equality. “The law is the same for every-
one,” note d one European traveler. Y et citizens of the 
new republic willingly accepted social divisions that 
reflected personal achievement, a ph enomenon that 
astounded many Europeans. “In Europe to say of some-
one that
 he rose from nothing is a di sgrace and a 
reproach,” remarked a Polish aris-
tocrat. “It is the opposite here. To 
be the architect of your own for-
tune is honorable. It is the highest 
recommenda t ion.”
Some Americans from long-
distinguished families felt threat-
ened by the ideology of wealth-driven social mobility. 
“Man is estimated by dollars,” complained Nathaniel 
Booth, whose  high-status family had once dominated 
the small Hudson River port town of Kingston, New 
York. However, for most white men, a merit-based sys-
tem meant the chance to better themselves (Map 8.1). 
Old cultural rules — and new laws — denied s uc h 
chances to most women and African American men. 
When women and free blacks asked for voting rights, 
male legislators wrote explicit race and gender restri c -
tions into t he law. I n 1802,  O hio d isenfranchised 
African Americans, and the New York constitution of 
1821 imposed a prop erty-holding requirement on 
black voters. A striking case of sexual discr im ination 
occurred in New Jersey, where the state constitution of 
1776 had granted the voting franchise to all property 
MAINE
VT.
N.H.
MASS.
NEW
YORK
R.I.CT.
PA.
N.J.
DEL.MD.
VA.
MICHIGAN  TERRITORY
OHIO
IND.
KY.
TENN.
ALA.
FLA.
S.C.
GA.
N.C.
ILL.
MO.
ARK.
TERR.
LA.
MISS.
CANADA
MAINE
(MASS.)
VT.
N.H.
MASS.
NEW
YORK
R.I.CT.
PA.
N.J.
DEL.MD.
VA.
INDIANA
TERRITORY
NORTHWEST
TERRITORY
CANADA
KY.
TENN.
S.C.
GA.
N.C.
MISSISSIPPI
TERRITORY
Property
qualifications
T axpayer
qualifications
Universal white
male suffrage
N
S
E
W
0 250 500 kilometers
0 500 miles 250
0 250 500 kilometers
0 500 miles 250
1800 1830
Property
qualifications
T axpayer
qualifications
Universal white
male suffrage
N
S
E
W
MAP 8.1 
The Expansion of Voting Rights for White Men, 1800 and 1830
Between 1800 and 1830, the United States moved steadily toward political equality for white 
men. Many existing states revised their constitutions and replaced a property qualiﬁcation for 
voting with less restrictive criteria, such as paying taxes or serving in the militia. Some new states 
in the West extended the suffrage to all adult white men. As parties sought votes from a broader 
electorate, the tone of politics became more open and competitive — swayed by the interests and 
values of ordinary people.
IDENTIFY CAUSES 
What factors encouraged — 
and inhibited — equality 
and democracy in early-
nineteenth-century 
American life? 

258 PART 3  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820
holders. As Federalists and Republicans competed for 
power, they ignored customary gender rules and urged 
property-owning sin gle women and widows to vote. 
Sensing a t hreat to men’s monopoly on politics, the 
New Jersey legislature in 1807 in voked both biology 
and custom to limit voting to men only: “Women, gen-
erally, are neither by nature, nor habit, nor education, 
nor by their necess a ry condition in society fitted t o 
perform this duty with credit to themselves or advan-
tage to the public.”
Toward Republican Families
The controversy over women’s political rights mirrored 
a debate over authority within the household. British 
and American husbands had long claimed patriarchal 
power and legal control of the famil y’s property. How-
ever, as John Adams lamented in 1776, the republican 
principle of equality had “spread where it was not 
intended,” encouraging his wife and other women to 
demand legal and financial rights. Patri ot author and 
historian Mercy Otis Warren argued that patriarchy was 
not a “natural” rule but a social contrivance and could 
be justified only “for the sake of order in families.” 
Republican Marriages  E conomic a nd cultural 
changes also eroded customary paternal authority. In 
colonial America, most property-owning parents had 
arranged their children’s marriages. They looked for a 
morally upright son- or daughter-in-law with financial 
resou
rces; physical attraction and emotional compati-
bility between the young people were secondary con-
siderations. As l andholdings s hrank in lo ng-settled 
communities, many yeomen fathers has less control 
over their children’s marriages because they had fewer 
resources to give them. 
Increasingly, young men and women chose  their 
own partners, influenced by a n ew cultural attitude: 
sentimentalism. Sentimentalism originated in Europe 
as part of the Romantic movement and, after 1800, 
spread quickly through all classes of American society. 
Rejecting the Enli ghtenment’s emphasis on rational 
thought, sentimentalism celebra ted the importance of 
“feeling” — a physical, sensuous appreciation of God, 
nature, and fellow humans. This new emphasis on 
deeply felt emotions pervaded literary works, p opul ar 
theatrical melodramas, and the passionate rhetoric of 
revivalist preachers.
As the passions of the heart overwhelmed the logic 
of the min d, magazin es praised companionate mar-
riages: marriages “contracted from motives of affec-
tion, rather t han of interest.” Many young people 
looked for a r elationship based on intimacy and a 
spouse who was, as E liza S outhgate of Maine put 
it, “calculated to promote  my happiness.” As youn g 
people “fell in love” and married, many fathers changed 
from authoritarian patriarchs to watchful paternalists. 
To guard against free-spending sons-in-law, wealthy 
fathers often placed their daughters’
 inheritance in a 
legal trust. One Virginia planter told his lawyer “to see 
the property sett lement properly d rawn before t he 
marriage, for I by no me ans consent that Polly shall be 
left to the Vicissitudes of Life.”
As voluntary contracts between individuals, love 
marriages conformed m ore closely t o republican 
principles than did arranged matches. In theor y, such 
marriages would be companionate, giving wives and 
husbands “true equality,” as one Boston man suggested. 
In practice, husbands d ominated m ost ma rriages, 
because male authority was de eply  ingrained in cul-
tural mores and because American common law gave 
husbands control of the family’s property. Moreover, 
the new love-based marriage system discouraged par-
ents from protecting you ng wives, and governments 
refused to prevent do mestic tyranny. The ma rriage 
contract “is so much more important in its conse-
quences to females than to males,” a young man at the 
Litchfield Law Scho ol  in Connecticut astutely observed 
in 1820, for “they subject themselves to his authority. 
He is their all — their only relative — their only hope” 
(American Voices, p. 260). 
Young adults who chose partners un wi sely were 
severely disappointed when their spouses failed as pro-
viders or faithful companions. Before 1800, unhappy 
wives and husbands could do  little; officials granted 
divor c es infrequently and then only in cases of neglect, 
abandonment, or adultery — seriou s offenses against 
the moral order of society. After 1800,  most divorce 
petitions cited emotional issues. One woman com-
plained that
 her husband had “ceased to cherish her,” 
while a man grieved that his wife had “almost broke his 
heart.” Responding to changing cultural values, several 
st
ates expanded the legal grounds for divorce to include 
drunkenness and personal cruelty.
Republican Motherhood T raditionally, most Amer-
i can women had spent their active adult years working 
as farmwives a nd bearing a nd nurturing children. 
However, after 1800,  t he birthrate in t he northern 
states dropped significantly .  In the farming village of 
To see a longer excerpt of the Mercy Otis Warren 
document, along with other primary sources from 
this period, see Sources for America’s History .

 CHAPTER 8  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820 259
Sturbridge in central Massachusetts, women now bore 
an average of six children; their grandmothers had 
usually given birth to eight or nine. In the growing sea-
port cities, native-bo rn  white women now bore an 
average of only four children.
The United States w as among the first nations to 
experience this sharp decline in the birthrate — what 
historians call the demographic transition. There were 
several causes. Beginning in the 1790s, thousands of 
young men migrated to the trans-Appalachian west, 
which increased the number of never-married women 
in t he East a nd de layed marriage for ma ny m ore. 
Women wh
o married in their late twenties had fewer 
children. In addition, white urban middle-class couples 
deliberately limited the size of their families. Fathers 
wanted to  leave ch ildren a n adeq uate inheritance, 
while mothers, influenced by new ideas of individual-
ism and self-achievement, refused to spend their entire 
adulthood rearing children. After having fou r or five 
children, these couples used birth control or abstained 
from sexual intercourse.
Even as women bore fewer children, they accepted 
greater responsibility for the welfare of the famil y. In 
his Thoughts on Female Education (1787), Philadelphia 
physician Benjamin Rush argued that young women 
should en sure their husbands’ “perseverance in the 
paths of rectitude” and called for lo yal “republican 
mothers” who would instruct “their sons in the prin-
ciples of liberty and government.”
The Wedding, 1805 
Bride and groom stare intently into each other’s eyes as they exchange vows, suggesting that their union 
was a love match, not an arranged marriage based on economic calculation. The plain costumes of the 
guests and the sparse fur
nishings of the room suggest that the unknown artist may have provided us 
with a picture of a rural Quaker wedding. The Granger Collection, NYC.
IDENTIFY CAUSES 
How did republican ideals, 
new economic circum-
stances, and changing 
cultural values affect mar-
riage practices?
To see a longer excerpt of Thoughts on Female 
Education, along with other primary sources from 
this period, see Sources for America’s History.
Christian m inisters readily em braced t his idea 
of republican motherhood . “Preserving virtue a nd 
instructing the young are not the fancied, but the real 
‘Rights of Women,’ ” the Reverend Thomas Bernard 
told the Female Charitable Society of Salem, Massa-
chusetts. He urged his audience to dismiss p ublic roles 
for women, such as voting or serv-
ing on juries, that English femi-
nist Ma ry W ollstonecraft had 
advocated in A Vindica tion of the 
Rights of Woman (1792). Instead, 
women should care for their chil-
dren, a r espo n sibility t hat ga ve 

260
AMERICAN  
VOICES
The Trials of 
Married Life
Emma Hart Willard
The Danger of High Expectations
Born in Connecticut in 1787, Emma Hart married John 
Willard in 1809. An early proponent of advanced education 
for women, she founded female academies in Middlebury, 
Vermont (1814), and Waterford and Troy, New York (1821). 
She wrote this letter to her sister, Almira Hart, in 1815.
You think it strange that I should consider a period of 
happiness as more likely than any other to produce future 
misery. I know I did not sufficiently explain myself. Those 
tender and delicious sensations which accompany suc-
cessful lo
ve, while they soothe and soften the mind, 
diminish its strength to bear or to conquer difficulties. 
It is the luxury of the soul; and luxury always ener-
vat
es. . . . This life is a life of vicissitude. . . .
[Suppose] you are secured to each other for life. It 
will be natural that, at first, he should be much devoted 
to you; but, after a while, his business must oc cupy his 
attention. While absorbed in that he will perhaps neglect 
some of those little tokens of affection which have become 
necessary to your happiness. His affairs will sometimes go 
wr
ong, . . . and he may sometimes hastily give you a harsh 
word or a frown.
But where is the use, say you, of diminishing my 
present enjoyment by such gloomy apprehensions? Its 
use is this, that, if you enter the marriage st ate believ-
ing such things to be absolutely impossible, if you 
should meet them, they would come upon you with 
double force.
Caroline Howard Gilman
Female Submission in Marriage
Born in Boston in 1794, Caroline Howard married in 1819 
and moved to Charleston, South Carolina, with her 
husband, Samuel Gilman, a Unitarian minister. A novelist, 
she published Recollections of a Housekeeper (1835), a 
portrait of domestic life in New England, and Recollections 
of a Southern Matron (1838), a ﬁctional account that 
includes this selection.
The planter’s bride, who leaves a numerous and cheerful 
family in her paternal home, little imagines the change 
which awaits her in her own retired residence. She dreams 
of an independent sway over her ho usehold, devoted love 
and unbroken intercourse with her husband, and indeed 
longs to be released from the eyes of others, that she may 
dwell only beneath the sun b eam of his. And so it was 
with me. . . .
There we were together, asking for nothing but 
each other’s presence and love. At length it was neces-
sary for him to tear hims e lf away to superintend his 
interests. . . . But the period of absence was gradually 
protracted; then a friend sometimes came home with him, 
and their talk was of crops and politics, draining the fields  
and draining the revenue. . . . A growing discomfort began 
to work upon my mind. I had undefined forebodings; I 
mused about past days; my views of life became slowly 
disorganized; my ph ysical powers enfeebled; a nervous 
excitement followed: I nursed a moody discontent. . . .
If the reign of romance was really waning, I resolved 
not to chill his noble confidence, but to make a st eadier 
light rise on his affections. . . . This task of self-government 
was not easy. To repress a harsh answer, to confess a 
fault . . . in gentle submission, sometimes requires 
a struggle like life and de
ath; but these . . . efforts are 
the golden threads with which domestic happiness 
is woven. . . . How clear is it, then, that woman loses 
by petulance and recriminatio n! Her fir st study must 
be self-control, almost to hypocrisy. A good wife must 
smile amid a thousand perplexities.
Martha Hunter Hitchcock
Isolation, Unmentionable Sorrows, 
and Suffering
Martha Hunter Hitchcock married a doctor in the U.S. 
Army. These excerpts from letters, in the Virginia Historical 
As the text explains, the ideal American marriage of the early nineteenth 
century was republican (a contract between equals) and romantic (a match in 
which mutual love was foremost). Were these ideals attainable, given the social 
authority of men and the volatility of human passions? Letters, memoirs, and 
diaries are excellent sources for answering these questions. These selections 
from the personal writings of a variety of American women offer insights into 
the new system of marriage and how changes in cultural values intersected with 
individual lives.

261
QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS
1. What problems do these women share? How might their 
problems reﬂect larger social and economic issues in 
nineteenth-century America?
2. How would you characterize the unhappiness of these 
women? In what ways is it related to their expectations 
about love-based marriage?
3. What was Caroline Gilman’s advice to wives? How does 
it apply to the other women in this section?
4. Do these selections suggest that most American women 
had unfulﬁlled marriages? Or were these isolated cases? 
Would you expect to ﬁnd more records of happy or 
unhappy marriages?
wives and husbands in understanding each other’s inner 
lives.
It has now been almost eight years since I became a mar-
ried woman. Eight years of checkered good and ill, and 
yet thro’ all it seems the most of the ill has fallen to my lot, 
until now my poor weak co wardly heart sighs only for its 
final resting place, where sorrow grief nor pain can never 
reach it more.
I feel that I have faithfully discharged my duty towards 
you and my ch
ildren, but for this I know that I deserve no 
credit nor aspire to none; my affection has been my 
prompter, and the task has proven a labor of love. You 
have not rightly understood me a t all times, and being 
naturally very hopeful you could in no measure sympa-
thize with me during my seasons of gloom and 
despondency. . . . But marriage is a lottery and that your 
draw proved an unf or tunate one on your part is not less a 
subject of regret with me than you. . . .
It is useless to say that during these eight years I have 
suffered ten times more than you have and ten times 
more than I can begin to make you co
nceive of, but of 
course you can not help the past, nor by knowing my suf-
fering relieve it, but it might induce you to look with 
more kindness up on [my] faults. . . . The 17th of this 
month I was 27 years old and I think my face looks older 
than that, perhaps I’ll never see an other birth day and I 
don’t grieve at the ide a.
Source: These selections are abridged versions of materials in Anya Jabour, ed., Major 
Problems in the History of American Families and Children (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 
2005), 108–113.
Society, to her cousins Martha and Sarah Hunter describe 
her emotional dependence on her husband and her 
unhappy life. 
To Martha Hunter, 1840:
If I had never married how much of pain, and dissat-
isfaction, should I have escaped — at all events I should 
never have known what jealousy is. You must not betray 
me, dear co u sin, for despite all my good resolutions, I 
find it impossible always to struggle against my nature — 
the school of indulgence, in which I was educated, was 
little calculated to teach me, those lessons of for b earance, 
which I have had to practice so frequently, since my mar-
riage — i t is ungrateful in me to murmur, if perchance a 
little bitter is mingled in my cup of life.
To Sarah Hunter, 1841:
I have li
ved so long among strangers since my mar-
riage, that when I contrast it with the old warm affection, 
in which I was nurtured, the contrast is so terrible, that I 
cannot refrain from weepi n g at the thought of it — I hope 
my dear cousin, that yours, will be a happier destiny than 
mine, in that respect — only  think of it! Nearly a year 
and a half have passed away, since I have s een, a sin gle 
relation!
To Martha Hunter, 1845:
Uneasiness about [my daughter] Lillie, and very great 
sorrows of my own, which I cannot commit to paper, 
have almost weighed me down to the grave; and indeed, 
witho
ut any affectation, I look forward to that, as the only 
real rest, I shall ever know.
To Martha Hunter, 1846:
Lillie had the scarlet fever, during our visit to 
Alabama, and she has never reco vered from the effects of 
it — My life is a constant vigil — and there is nothing 
which wearies mind, and body, so much, as watching a 
sickly child. . . . All this I have to endure, and may have to 
suffer more for I kn
ow not, what Fate may have in store 
for me.
Elizabeth Scott Neblett
My Seasons of Gloom and Despondency
Elizabeth Scott Neblett lived with her husband and chil-
dren in Navarro County, Texas. In 1860, she reﬂected in her 
diary on her bouts of depression and the difﬁculties of 

262 PART 3  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820
them “an extensive power over the fortunes of man in 
every generation.”
Raising Republican Children
Republican values changed assumptions about inheri-
tance a nd child rearing. E nglish common law e n-
couraged primogeniture, the bequest of the family’s 
property to the eldest son (Chapter 1). After the Rev-
olutio
n, most state legislatures enacted statutes speci-
fying equal division of the estate among all children, 
when t here was no will. M ost Ame rican parents 
applauded these statutes because they were alrea d y 
treating their children equally and with respect.
Two Modes of Parenting I ndeed, many European 
visitors believed t hat republican parents gave t heir 
children too much respect and freedom. Because of 
the “general ideas of Liberty and Equality engraved 
on their hearts,” a Pol
ish aristocrat suggested around 
1800, Ame rican children had “scant respect” for 
their parents. Several decades later, a Bri tish traveler 
stood d umb fou n ded when a n Ame rican father 
excused his son’s “resolute disobedience” with a smile 
and the remark, “A  s turdy republican, sir.” The traveler 
speculated that American parents encour aged such 
independence to prepare youth to “go their ow n way” 
in the world.
Permissive child rearing was not universal. Foreign 
visitors interacted primarily with well-to-do Episco-
palians and Presbyterians wh o held an Enlightenment 
conception of children. This outlook, transmitted by 
religious authors influenced by John Locke, viewed chil-
dren as “rational creatures” best trained by me ans of 
advice and praise. The parents’ role was to develop their 
child’s conscience, self-discipline, and sense of responsi-
bility. Families in the rapidly expanding mi ddle class 
widely adopte d t his rationalist method of child rearing. 
By contrast, many yeomen a nd ten ant farmers, 
influenced by t he Se cond Great Awakening, raised 
their children in an authoritarian fashio n. E vangelical 
Baptist and Methodist writers insisted that children 
were “full of the stains and pollution of sin” and needed 
strict rules and harsh discipline. Fear was a “useful and 
necessary p rinciple in family government,” minister 
John Abbott advised parents; a child “should submit to 
your authority, not to your arguments or persuasions.” 
Abbott told parents to instill humility in ch il dren and 
to teach them to subordinate their personal desires to 
God’s will.
The Battle over Education 
Here an unknown artist pokes fun at a 
tyrannical schoolmaster and, indir
ectly, 
at the strict approach to child rearing 
taken by evangelical authors, parents, 
and teachers. The students’ faces reﬂect 
the artist’s own rationalist outlook. One 
Enlightenment-minded minister suggested 
that we see in young children’s eyes “the 
ﬁrst dawn of reason, beaming forth its 
immortal rays.” 
Picture Research Consultants & 
Archives.

 CHAPTER 8  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820 263
Debates over Education  A lthough families pro-
vided most moral and intellectual training, republican 
ideology e ncouraged publicly supported s chooling. 
Bostonian Caleb Bingham, a n influential te xtbook 
author, called for “an equal distri bution of knowledge 
to make us emphatically a ‘republic of letters.’ ” Both 
Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Rush proposed ambi-
tious schemes for a comprehensive system of primary 
and secondary sc hoolin g, followed by college training 
for bright young men. They also envisioned a univer-
sity in which distinguished scholars would lecture on 
law, medicine, theology, and political economy. 
To ordinary citizens, wh ose teenage children had to 
labor in the fields or workshops, talk of secondary and 
college education smacked of elitism. Farmers, artisans, 
and laborers wanted elementary scho ols that would 
instruct t heir children in t he “three Rs” — reading, 
’riting, and ’rithmetic — and make them literate enough 
to read the Bible. In New England, locally funded pub-
lic schools offered basic instru ction to most boys and 
some girls. In other regions, there were few publicly 
supported schools, and only 25 percent of the boys and 
perhaps 10 percent of the girls attended pr ivate institu-
tions or had personal tutors. Even in New England, 
only a f ew young men and almost no young women 
went on to grammar school (high school), and less than 
1 percent of men at
tended college. “Let anybody show 
what advantage the poor man receives from colleges,” 
an anonymous “Old Soldier” wrote to  the Mary land 
Gazette. “Why should they support them, unless it is to 
serve those who are in affluent cir cumstances, whose 
children can be spared from labor, and receive the 
benefits?” 
Although ma ny state constitutions encour aged 
support for ed ucation, few legislatures ac ted until 
the 1820s . Then a n ew ge neratio n of ed ucational 
reformers, influenced by me rchants a nd ma nufac-
turers, raised standards by certifying qualified teach-
ers a nd a ppointing state wide s uperintendents of 
schools. To e nco ur age students, 
the reformers chose te xtbooks 
such as Pa rson Mason Weems’s 
The Life of George Washington  
(c. 1800), which praised honesty 
and hard work and condemned 
gambling, drinking, and laziness. 
To bolster patriotism and shared 
cultural ide
als, reformers required 
the study of American history. As 
a New Hampshire schoolboy, Thomas Low recalled: 
“We were taught every day and in every way that ours 
was the frees t , the happiest, and soon to be the greatest 
and most powerful country of the world.”
Promoting Cultural Independence  L ike Caleb 
Bingham, writer Noah Webster wanted to  raise the 
nation’s intellectual prowess. Asserting that “ America 
must be as independent in literature as she is in poli-
tics,” he called on his fello w citizens to free themselves 
“from the dependence on foreign opinions and man-
ners, which is fatal to the efforts of genius in this coun-
try.” Webster’s Dissertation on the English Language  
(1789) celebrated languag e as a ma rker of national 
identity by definin g words a ccording t o Ame rican 
usage. With less success, it proposed that words be 
spelled as they were pronounced, that labour (British 
spelling), for example, be spelled la bur. Still, Webster’s 
famous “blue-back speller,” a co mpact tex tbook first 
published in 1783, sold 60 million copies over the next 
half century and served the needs of Americans of all 
backgrou n ds. “None of us was ’lowed to see a book,” an 
enslaved African American recalled, “but we gits hold 
Women’s Education 
Even in education-conscious New England, 
befor
e 1800 few girls attended free public 
primary schools for more than a few years. 
Subsequently, as this detail from Scenes 
from a Seminary for Young Ladies (c. 1810– 
1820) indicates, some girls stayed in school 
into their teenage years and studied a wide 
variety of subjects, including geography. 
Many graduates of these female acade-
mies became teachers, a new ﬁeld of 
employment for women. 
The St. Louis Art 
Museum, Missouri, USA/The Bridgeman Art 
Library.
UNDERSTAND 
POINTS OF VIEW 
Which form of child 
rearing — the rationalist 
or the authoritarian — was 
the most compatible with 
republican values and 
why?

264 PART 3  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820
of t hat Webster’s old blue-back s peller a nd we . . . 
studies [it].”
Despite Webster’s efforts, a republican literary cul-
ture developed slowly. Ironically, the most successful 
writer in the new republic was W ashington Irving, an 
elitist-minded Fede ralist. H is whimsical essa y a nd 
story collections — which included the tales of “Rip 
Van Winkle” and “The Legend of Sleepy Hollow” — sold 
well in America and won praise abroad. Frustra ted by 
the immaturity of American cultural life, Irving lived 
for sev enteen years in Europe, reveling in its aristo-
cratic culture and intense intellectuality.
Apart from Irving, no Ameri c an author was well 
known in Europe or, indeed, in the United States. “Lit-
erature is not yet a distinct profession with us,” Thomas 
Jefferson told an E nglish friend. “Now and t hen a 
strong mind arise s , and at i ts intervals from business 
emits a flash of light. But the first object of young soci-
eties is bread and covering.” Not until the 1830s and 
1840s would American authors achieve a professional 
identity and make a significant co ntribution to Western 
literature (Chapter 11).
Aristocratic Republicanism 
and Slavery
Republicanism in the South differed significantly from 
that in the North. Enslaved Africans constituted one-
third of the South’s population; their bondage contra-
dicted the new nation’s professed ideology of freedom 
and equality. “How is it that
 we hear the loudest yelps 
for liberty am ong t he driv ers of Negroes?” British 
author Samuel Johnson had chided the American reb-
els in 1775, a po in t that some Patriots took to heart. “I 
wish most sincerely there was not a Slave in the prov-
ince,” Abigail Adams confessed to her husband, John. 
“It always a ppeared a m ost iniquitous S cheme t o 
me — to fight ourselves for what  we are daily robbing 
and plundering from those who have as good a right to 
freedom as we have.”
The Revolution and Slavery, 
1776–1800
In fact, t he whites’ struggle for independence had 
raised the prospect of freedom for blacks. As the Revo-
lutionary War began, a black preacher in Georgia told 
his fellow slaves that King G e orge III “came up with 
the Book [the Bible], and was about to alter the World, 
and set t he Negroes free.” Similar rumors, probably 
prompted by Royal Governor Lord Dunmore’s procla-
mation of 1775 (Chapter 5), cir cul ated among slaves in 
Virginia and the Carolinas, prompting thousands of 
African Americans to flee behind British lines. Two 
neighbors of Virginia Patriot Richard Henry Lee lost 
“every slave they had in the world,” as did many other 
planters. In 1781,  when the Br
itish army evacuated 
Charleston, more than 6,000 former slaves went with 
them; a nother 4 ,000 left from Sa vannah. A ll t old, 
30,000 blacks may have fled their ow
ners. Hundreds of 
freed black Loyalists settled permanently in Canada. 
More t han 1 ,000 others, poorly t reated in British 
Nova Scotia, sought a bet ter life in Sierra Leone, West 
Republican Families . . . and Servants 
Around 1828, an unidentiﬁed artist painted this York, 
Pennsylvania, family with an African American servant. 
The artist gives equal emphasis to the wife and the hus-
band, suggesting they enjoyed a companionate-style 
marriage. Reﬂecting the outlook of r
epublican mother-
hood, the mother takes the leading role in educating the 
children. The family, probably of upper-middle-class status 
given their attire and furnishings, employs an African 
American woman as a domestic servant and nanny — 
common occupations among free black women of the 
time. 
The Saint Louis Art Museum, Missouri, USA/The Bridgeman 
Art Library.

 CHAPTER 8  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820 265
Africa, a sett lement founded by English antislavery 
organizations. 
Manumission and Gradual Emancipation  Ye t  
thousands of African Americans supported the Patriot 
cause. Eager to raise their social status, free blacks in 
New England volunteered for military service in the 
First Rhode Island Company and the Massachuse tts 
“Bucks.” In Maryland, some slaves took up arms for the 
rebels in return for the promise of freedom. Enslaved 
Virginians struck informal bargains with their Patriot 
owners, trading lo yal ty in wartime for the hope of lib-
erty. Following the Virginia legislature’s passage of a 
manumission act in 1782, allowing owners to free their 
slaves, 10,000 slaves won their freedom.
Two other developments — on e religious, the other 
intellectual — encour aged manumission. Beginning in 
the 1750s,  Quaker evangelist Joh
n Woolman urged 
Friends to free their slaves, and many did so. Rapidly 
growing evangelical churches, especially Methodists 
and Baptists, initially advocated slave emanci p ation; in 
1784, a conf erence of Virginia Methodists declared 
that slavery was “contrary to the 
Golden La w of G od on which 
hang all the Law and Prophets.”
Meanwhile, E nlightenment 
philosophy challenge d t he wide-
spread belief among whites that 
Africans were inherently inferior t o E uropeans. 
According to John Locke, ideas were not innate but 
stemmed from a p erson’s experiences in the world. 
Poi
nting out the obvious — “ A state of slavery has a 
mighty tendency to shrink and contract the min ds 
of men” — Enlightenment-influenced Americans sug-
gested that the debased condition of blacks reflected 
their oppressive captiv ity. Q uaker philanthropist 
Anthony Benezet de clared t hat A frican Ame ricans 
were “as capable of improvement as White People” and 
funded a Philadelphia school for their education.
Swept along by these religio u s and intellectual cur-
rents, legislators in northern states e nacted gradual 
emancipation statutes (Map 8.2). These l aws recog-
nized white property rights by requiring slaves to buy 
their freedom by years — even decades — of  additio
nal 
IDENTIFY CAUSES  
Why did aristocratic repub-
licanism develop in the 
South, and what were its 
deﬁning features? 
This simple map illustrates a complex process:
the abolition of slavery in the United States up
to 1800. The political boundaries are those of
the states and territories in 1800.
The three colors show areas where slavery was
legally abolished, where it continued to exist,
and where it was in the process of being eliminated. 
In 1800, the free black population of the
United States numbered about 100,000, 
roughly 10 percent of those of African
ancestry. Half of these free blacks lived
in states in which slavery remained
legal until the end of the Civil W ar.
Some areas marked
“free” on the map,
the Indiana T erritory,
for example, actually
had slaves dating from
the French colonial days.
Free (date when
slavery eliminated)
Gradual abolition
Slave
0 100 200 kilometers
0 100 200 miles
N
S
EW
A TLANTIC
OCEAN
Gulf of Mexico
L. Superior
L. M
ichigan
L. Erie
L. Huron
L. Ontario
SOUTH
CAROLINA
NORTH CAROLINATENNESSEE
VIRGINIA
GEORGIA
NEW YORK
PENNSYLVANIA
NEW JERSEY
CONN.
MASS.
(1780)
N.H.
(1783)
VERMONT
(1777)
RHODE
ISLAND
MARYLAND
DELAWARE
BRITISH
NORTH AMERICA
SPANISH
LOUISIANA
MAINE
(part of MASS.)
(1780)
KENTUCKY
OHIO 
TERRITORY
(1787)
INDIANA
TERRITORY
(1787)
FUTURE
MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY
(after Paullin)
SP ANISH FLORIDA
MAP 8.2 
The Status of Slavery, 1800
In 1775, racial slavery was legal in 
all of the British colonies in North 
America. By the time the confederated 
states achieved their independence 
in 1783, the New England region was 
mostly free of slavery. By 1800, all 
of the states north of Maryland had 
provided for the gradual abolition 
of slavery, but the process of gradual 
emancipation dragged on until the 
1830s. Some slave owners in the 
Chesapeake region manumitted a 
number of their slaves, leaving only 
the whites of the Lower South ﬁrmly 
committed to racial bondage.

266 PART 3  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820
labor. For example, the New York Emancipation Act 
of 1799 a llowed slavery to continue until 1828 a nd 
freed slave children only at t he age of  twenty-five. 
Consequently, as l ate as 1810,  almost 30, 000 blacks 
in t he no r thern states — nearly one-fourth of t he 
African Americans living there — w ere still enslaved. 
Freed blacks faced severe prejudice from whites who 
feared j ob competition a nd racial mel ding. W hen 
Ma
ssachusetts judges abolished slavery through case 
law in 1784, the legislature reenacted an old statute that 
prohibited whites from marrying blacks, mulattos, or 
Indians. For African Americans in the No r th, freedom 
meant second-class citizenship. 
Slavery Defended  The s outhern states faced the 
most glaring contradiction between liberty and prop-
erty rights, because enslaved blacks represented a huge 
financial investment. Some Chesapeake tobacco plant-
ers, moved by evangelical religio
n or an oversupply of 
workers, manumitted their slaves or allowed them to 
buy their freedom by working as artisans or laborers. 
Such measures graduall y brought freedom to one-third 
of the African Americans in Maryland. 
Farther south, slavery remained ascendant. Fearing 
total emancipation, hundreds of slave owners peti-
tioned the Virginia legislature to repeal the manumis-
sio
n act. Heeding this demand to protect “the most 
valuable and indispensible Article of our Property, our 
Slaves,” legislators for b ade further manumissions in 
1792. Following the lead of Thomas Jefferson, who 
owned more than a hun dred slaves, political leaders 
now argued that slavery was a “necessary evil” required 
to maintain white supremacy and the l uxurious planter 
lifestyle. I n North Carolina, legislators condemned 
private Q uaker ma numissions as “hig hly criminal 
and reprehensible.” Moreover, the slave-hungry rice-
grow
ing states of South Carolina and Georgia reopened 
the Atlantic slave trade. Between 1790 and 1808, mer-
chants in Charleston and Savannah imported about 
115,000 A fricans, se lling t housands t o F rench a nd 
Ameri
can sugar planters in Louisiana. 
Debate in the South over emancipation ended in 
1800, when Virginia authorities thwarted an uprising 
planned by Gabriel Prosser, an enslaved artisan, and 
hange
d him and thirty of his followers. “Liberty and 
equality have brought the evil upon us,” a letter to the 
Virginia Herald proclaimed, denouncin g s uch d oc-
trines as “dangerous and ex tremely wicked.” To pre-
serve their pr
ivileged social position, southern leaders 
redefined republicanism. They restricted individual 
liberty and legal equality to whites, creating what histo-
rians call a herrenvolk (“master race”) republic.
The North and South Grow Apart
European visitors t o t he United States ag reed t hat 
North and South had di stinct characters. A Bri tish 
observer labeled New England the home to religious 
“fanaticism” but added that “the lower orders of citi-
zens”
 there had “a better education, [and were] more 
intelligent” than those he met in the South. “The state 
of poverty in which a great number of white people live 
in V irginia” surprised t he Ma rquis de Ch astell ux. 
Other visitors to the South likewise commented on the 
rude manners, heavy drinking, and weak work ethic of 
its residents. White tenants and smallholding farmers 
seemed only to have a “passio n for gaming at the bil-
liard table, a cock-fig ht or cards,” and rich planters 
squandered their wealth on extravagant lifestyles while 
their slaves endured bitter poverty.
Some southerners w orried that human bondage 
had corrupted white society. “Where there are Negroes 
a White Man despises to work,” one South Carolina 
merchant commented. Moreover, well-to-do planters, 
able to hire tutors for their ow n children, did little to 
provide other whites with elementary schooling. In 
1800, elected officials in Essex County, Virginia, spent 
about 25 cents per person for lo c al government, includ-
ing s chools, while t heir counterparts in A cton, 
Massachusetts, allocated about $1 per person. This dif-
ference in s upport for ed ucation mattered: by t he 
1820s, nearly all native-bo rn  men and women in New 
England could read and write, while more than one-
third of white southerners could not.
Slavery and National Politics  As t he northern 
states ended human bondage, the South’s commitment 
to slavery became a political issue. At the Philadelphia 
convention in 1787, northern delegates had reluctantly 
accepted clauses a llowing s lave impo rts for t wenty 
years and gu aranteeing the return of fugitive slaves 
(Chapter 6). Seeking even more protection for their 
“peculiar institution,” southerners in the new natio nal 
legislature won approval of James Madison’s resolution 
that “Congress have no authority to interfere in the 
emancipation of slaves, or in the treatment of them 
within any of the S tates. ” 
Nonetheless, slavery remained a contested issue. 
The black slave revolt in Haiti brought 6,000 white and 
mulatto planters and their slaves to the United States in 
1793, a nd st ories of Ha itian at ro ci ties frightened 
American slave owners (Chapter 7). Meanwhile, north-
ern politicians assa iled t he British impressment of 
American sailors as just “as oppressive and tyrannical 
as the slave trade” and demanded the en d of both. 

 CHAPTER 8  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820 267
When Congress outlawed the Atlantic slave trade in 
1808, some northern representatives demanded an end 
to the trade in slaves between states. Southern leaders 
responded with a forceful defense  of their labor system. 
“A  large majority of people in the Southern states do 
not consider slavery as even an evil,” declared one con-
gressman. The South’s political clout — its domination 
of the presidenc y  and the Sen ate — en sured that the 
national government would protect slavery. American 
diplomats vigorously dema nded compensation for 
slaves freed by British troops during the War of 1812, 
and Congress enacte d legislation upholding slavery in 
the District of Columbia.
African Americans Speak Out  Hea rtened by the 
end of t he At lantic s lave t rade, black a bolitionists 
spoke out. In speeches and pamphlets, Henry Sipkins 
and Henry Johnson pointed out that slavery — “relent-
less tyranny,” they called it — was a central legacy of 
Ameri
ca’s colonial history. For inspiration, they looked 
to the Haitian Revolution; for collective support, they 
joined in secret societies, such as Prince Hall’s African 
Lodg e of Freemasons in Boston. Initially, black (and 
white) antislavery advocates hoped that slavery would 
die out naturally as t he tobacco economy declined. 
However, a boo m in cotton planting dr am at ically 
increased the demand for slaves, and Louisiana (1812), 
Mississippi (1817), and Alabama (1819) j oined t he 
Union with state constitutions permitting slavery. 
As some Americans redefined slavery as a pro bl em 
rather than a centuries-old social condition, a group of 
prominent citizens founded the American Colonization 
Society in 1817. According to Henry Clay — a s ociety 
member, Speaker of the House of Representatives, and 
a s lave owner — racial bondage hindered e conomic 
progress. It h ad placed his state of  Kentucky “in the 
rear of ou r  neighbors . . . in the state of agriculture, the 
progress of manufactures, the advance of improve-
ment, and the general prosperity of society.” Clay and 
other coloniza t ionists argued t hat slaves had to be 
freed and then resettled, in Africa or elsewhere; eman-
cipation without removal would lead to chaos — “a 
civil war that would end in the extermination or subju-
ga
tion of the one race or the other.” Given the cotton 
boom, few planters responded to the society’s plea. It 
resettled only a bout 6, 000 A frican Ame ricans in 
Liberia, its colony on the west coast of Afri c a.
Most free blacks st rongly opposed s uch colo-
nization s chemes because t hey sa w t hemselves as 
Americans. As Bi shop Richard Allen of the African 
Methodist Episcopal Church put it, “[T]his land which 
we have wat
ered with our tears 
and our blood is now our mother 
country.” Allen spoke from expe-
rience. Born into s lavery in 
Philadelphia in 1760 and sold to a 
farmer in Delaware, Allen grew 
up in bo
ndage. In 1777, Freeborn 
Garretson, an itinerant preacher, converted Allen to 
Methodism a nd convinced A llen’s owner t hat on 
Judgment Day, slaveholders would be “weighted in the 
balance, and . . . fou
nd wanting.” Allowed to buy his 
freedom, Allen enlisted in the Methodist cause, becom-
ing a “licensed exhorter” and then a regular minister in 
Aristocratic Republicanism in South 
Carolina 
The money that paid for Drayton Hall came 
originally fr
om raising cattle in South Carolina 
for sale in the West Indies. At his death in 
1717, Thomas Drayton left an estate that 
included 1,300 cattle and 46 slaves (both 
Native American and African). His third son, 
John (1715–1779), used his inheritance to buy 
slaves and to create a rice-growing plantation 
along the Ashley River. The home he erected 
on the site, Drayton Hall (built 1738–1742), 
reﬂected the designs of Andrea Palladio, the 
Italian Renaissance architect who celebrated 
the concepts of classical Roman proportion 
and decoration in his widely read The Four 
Books of Architecture (1516). 
Photo courtesy 
of Drayton Hall.
EXPLAIN 
CONSEQUENCES 
Why did the colonization 
movement of the 1810s 
fail? 

268 PART 3  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820
Philadelphia. In 1795, Allen formed a separate black 
congregation, the Bethel Church; in 1816, he became 
the first bishop of a n ew deno mination: the African 
Methodist Episcopal Church. Two years later, 3,000 
Afri
can Americans met in Allen’s church to condemn 
colonization a nd t o claim Americ an citizenship. 
Sounding the principles of democratic republicanism, 
they vowed to defy  racial prejudice and advance in 
Ameri
can society using “those opportunities . . . which 
the Constitution and the laws allow to all.”
The Missouri Crisis, 1819–1821
The abject failure of colonization set t he stage for a 
major battle over s lavery. I n 1818,  Congressman 
Nathaniel Macon of North Carolina warned that radi-
cal members of the “bible and peace societies” intended 
to place “
the question of emancipation” on the national 
political agenda. When Missouri applied for admission 
to the Union in 1819, Congressman James Tallmadge 
of New York did so: he would support statehood for 
Missou ri  only if its constitution banned the entry of 
new slaves and provided for the emancipation of exist-
ing bonds-people. Missouri whites rejected Tallmadge’s 
proposals, and the northern majority in the House of 
Repres
entatives blocked the territory’s admission.
White southerners were horrified. “It is believed by 
some, & f eared by others,” Alabama se nator J ohn 
Walker reported from Washington, that Tallmadge’s 
amendment was “ me rely the entering wedge and that it 
points already to a total emancipation of the blacks.” 
Mississippi congressman Christopher Rankin accused 
his northern colleagues of brinksmanship: “You con-
duct us to an awful prec ipice, and hold us over it.” 
Underlining their commitment to slavery, southerners 
used their power in the Senate — where they held half 
the seats — to withhold statehood from Maine, w hich  
was seeking to separate itself from Massachusetts.
Constitutional Issues I n the ensuing debate, south-
erners advanced three constitutional arguments. First, 
they invoked the principle of “equal rights,” arguing 
that Congress could not impose conditions on Missou ri  
that it had not imposed on other territories. Second, 
they maintained that the Constitution guaranteed a 
state’s sovereignty with respect to its internal affairs and 
domestic institutio n s, such as s lavery and marriage. 
Finally, they insisted that Congress had no authority 
to infringe on the property rights of individual slave-
holders. Beyond those arguments, s outhern le aders 
defended human bondage. Downplaying the proposi-
tion that slavery was a “necessary evil,” they now justi-
fied slavery on religious grounds. “Christ himself gave 
a sanction to slavery , ” declared Senator William Smith 
of South Carolina. “If it be offensive and sinful to own 
slaves,” a prominent Mississippi Methodist added, “I 
The Reverend Richard Allen and the African Methodist Episcopal Church 
One of the best-known African Americans in the early republic, Richard Allen founded a separate congrega-
tion for Philadelphia’
s black Methodists, the Bethel Church. Working with other ministers in 1816, he created 
the ﬁrst independent black religious domination in the United States — the African Methodist Episcopal 
(AME) Church — and became its ﬁrst bishop. 
Library of Congress / Picture Research Consultants & Archives.

 CHAPTER 8  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820 269
wish someone would just put his finger on the place in 
Holy Writ.”
Controversy raged in Congress and the press for 
two years before Henry Clay devised a series of politi-
cal ag reements known collectively as t he Missouri 
Compromise. Faced with unwavering southern opposi-
tion to Tallmadge’s amendment, a group of northern 
congressmen deser ted the antislavery coalition. They 
accepted a deal that allowed Maine to enter the Union 
as a free state in 1820 and Missou ri to follow as a slave 
state in 1821. This bargain preserved a balance in the 
Senate between North and South and set a pr ecedent 
for future admi ssions to the Union. For their part, 
southern senators accepte d the prohibition of slavery 
in most of the Louisiana Purchase, all the lands north 
of latitude 36°30' exc ept for t he state of  M issouri 
(Map 8.3). 
As they had in the Philadelphia conventio n of 1787, 
white politicians preserved the Union by compromis-
ing over slavery. However, the delegates in Philadelphia 
had resolved their sectional differences in two months; 
it took Congress two years to work out the Missou ri 
Compromise, which even then did not command uni-
versal support. “[B]eware,” the Richmond Enquirer pro-
tested sharply as s outhern representatives agreed to 
exclude slavery from most of the Lou isiana Purchase: 
“What is a territorial restriction to-day becomes a state 
restriction tomorrow.” The fate of the western lands, 
enslaved blacks, and t he Union 
itself were now intertwined, rais-
ing the specter of civil war and the 
end of the Americ an republican 
experiment. As the aging Thomas 
Jefferson e xclaime d d uring t he 
Missouri crisis, “This momentous 
question, like a fir e-bell in the night, awakened and 
filled me with terror.”
Protestant Christianity 
as a Social Force
Throughout the colonial era, religion played a signifi-
cant role in American life but not an overwhelming 
one. Then, beginning around 1790, religious revivals 
planted the values of Protestant Christianity deep in 
the natio
nal character and gave a spiritual dimension 
to American republicanism. These r evivals especially 
changed the lives of blacks and of women. Thousands 
of African Ameri c ans became Baptists and Methodists 
and created a powerful institution: the black Christian 
Church. Evangelical Christianity also gave rise to new 
public roles for white women, especially in the No r th, 
and set in m otion long-lasting movements for social 
reform.
Free
Slave
Closed to slavery by the
Missouri Compromise
Opened to slavery by the
Missouri Compromise
N
S
E
W
0 200 400 kilometers
0 400 miles 200
CANADA ME.
(Admitted as
free state, 1820)
MO.
(Admitted as
slave state, 1821)
VT.
N.H.
N.Y .
PA.
OHIO
IND.
KY .
TENN.
ILL.
N.J.
DEL.MD.
VA .
N.C.
S.C.
GA.ALA.MISS.
LA.
FLORIDA
TERRITORY
ARKANSAS
TERRITORY
MEXICAN
POSSESSIONS
UNORGANIZED
TERRITORY
MASS.
R.I.CT.
MICHIGAN 
                  
Gulf of Mexico
A TLANTIC
OCEAN
MAP 8.3 
The Missouri Compromise, 1820–1821
The Missouri Compromise resolved for 
a generation the issue of slavery in the 
lands of the Louisiana Purchase. The 
agreement prohibited slavery north of 
the Missouri Compromise line (36°30’ 
north latitude), with the exception of 
the state of Missouri. To maintain an 
equal number of senators from free 
and slave states in the U.S. Congress, 
the compromise provided for the 
nearly simultaneous admission to 
the Union of Missouri and Maine.
PLACE EVENTS 
IN CONTEXT 
What compromises over 
slavery did Congress make 
to settle the Missouri 
crisis? 

270 PART 3  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820
A Republican Religious Order
The republican revolution of 1776 forc ed American 
lawmakers to devise new relationships between church 
and state. Previously, only the Quaker- and Baptist-
controlled governments of Pennsylvania and Rhode 
Island had reject
ed a l egally established church that 
claimed everyone as a member and collected compul-
sory religious taxes. Then, a convergence of factors — 
Enlightenment principles, wartime needs, and Baptist  
ideology — eliminated most state support for religion 
and allowed voluntary church membership.
Religious Freedom E vents in Virginia revealed the 
dynamics of change. I n 1776,  James Madi son a nd 
George Mason advanced Enlightenment ideas of reli-
gious toleration as they persuaded the state’s constitu-
tional conventio n t o guarantee all Christians the “free 
exercise of religion.” This measure, which ended the 
privileged legal status of the Anglican Church, won 
Presbyterian and Baptist support for the independence 
struggle. Baptists, wh
o also opposed public support of 
religion, convinced lawmakers t o reject a tax  bill 
(supported by George Washington and Patrick Henry) 
that would have funded all Christian churches. Instead, 
in 1786,  t he V irginia legislature en acte d Th omas 
Jefferson’s bill for Esta blishing Re ligious F reedom, 
which made all churches equal in the eyes of the law 
and granted direct financial support to none. 
Elsewhere, the old order of a sin gle established 
church crumbled away. In New York and New Jersey, 
the sheer number of deno minations — Episcopalian, 
Presbyterian, Dutch Reformed, Lutheran, and Quaker, 
among others — pr evente d lawmakers from agreeing 
on an established church or compulsory religious taxes. 
Congregationalism remained the official church in the 
New England states un til the 1830s, but members of 
other denominatio ns could now pay taxes to their own 
churches.
Church-State Relations Fe w influential Americans 
wanted a co mplete separation of church a nd state 
because they believed that religious institutions pro-
moted m orality a nd g overnmental a uthority. “Pure 
religio n a nd civil liberty are inseparable companions,” 
a g roup of North Carolinians 
advised their minister. “It is your 
particular duty to enlighten man-
kind with the unerring principles 
of t ruth a nd j ustice, t he ma in 
props of a ll ci
vil g overnment.” 
Accepting this premise, most state 
governments indirectly supported churches by exempt-
ing their property and ministers from taxation.
Freedom of co n science also came with sharp cul-
tural limits. In Virginia, Jefferson’s Religious Freedom 
act prohibited religious requirements for holding 
public office, but other states d iscriminated against 
those  who were not Protestant Christians. The North 
Carolina Constitution of 1776 disqualified from public 
office any citizen “who shall deny the being of God, 
or the Truth of the Protestant Religion, or the Div ine 
Authority of the Old or New Testament.” New Hamp-
shire’s constitution contained a si milar provision 
until 1868.
Americans influenced by E nlightenment dei sm 
and by e vangelical P rote sta ntism condemned t hese 
religious restrictions. Jefferson, Franklin, a nd other 
American intellectuals maintained that God had given 
humans the power of reason so that they could deter-
mine moral truths for them selves. To protect society 
from “ecclesiastical tyranny,” they demanded complete 
freedom of conscience. The “truth is great and will 
prevail if left to herself,” Jefferson declared; “religio n 
is a matte r which lies solely between man and his 
God.” Many evangelical Protestants likewise demanded 
religious liberty t o protect t heir churches from a n 
oppressive government. Isaac Back u s, a New England 
minister, warned Baptists not t o incorporate their 
churches or accept public funds because that might 
lead to state con trol. In Connecticut, a de vout Con-
gregationalist welcomed “ voluntarism,” the funding 
of churches by their members; it allowed the laity to 
control the clergy, he said, while also supporting self-
government and “the principles of republicanism.”
Republican Church Institutions  F ollowing inde-
pendence, Americans embraced churches that preached 
spiritual equality and governed themselves democrati-
cally while ignoring t hose with hierarchical a nd 
authoritarian institutions. Preferri n g Luther’s doctrine 
of the priesthood of all believers, few citizens accepted 
the authority claimed by Roman Catholic priests and 
bishops. Likewise, few Americans joined the Prote sta nt 
Episcopal Church, t he s uccessor t o t he Church of 
England, because wealthy lay mem bers do minated 
many congregations and it, too, had a hie rarchy of 
bishops (Figure 8.1). The Presbyterian Ch urch attracted 
more adherents, in part because its churches elected lay 
members to synods, the congresses that deter mined 
doctrine and practice. 
Evangelical Methodist and Baptist ch urches were 
by far the most successful institutions in attracting 
new members, especially from the “unchurched” — the 
UNDERSTAND 
POINTS OF VIEW
What were the main 
principles of the new 
republican religious 
regime? 

 CHAPTER 8  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820 271
great number of irreligious Americ ans. The B aptists 
boasted a thoroughly republican church organization, 
with self-governing congregations. Also, Baptists (and 
Methodists as well) developed an egalitarian religio u s 
culture marked by communal singing and emotional 
services. These denominations formed a dynamic new 
force in American religion. 
The Second Great Awakening
As Ame ricans adopted new religious principles, a 
decades-long seri es of religious revivals — the Second 
Great Awakening — made the United States a genuinely 
Christian society. Evangelical denominations began the 
revival in the 1790s, as t hey spread their message in 
seacoast cities and the backcountry of New England. A 
new sect of Uni v ersalists, who repudiated Calvinism 
and preached universal salvation, also gained tens of 
thousands of converts, especially in Massachusetts and 
northern New England. After 1800, enthusiastic camp 
me
etings swept the frontier regions of South Carolina, 
Tennessee, Ohio, and Kentucky. The largest gathering, at 
Cane Ridge in Kentucky in 1801, lasted for nine electri-
fying da ys a nd nights a nd a tt racted a lmost 20, 000 
people (Map 8 .4). With t hese revivals, Baptist a nd 
Methodist preachers reshaped the spiritual landscape 
throughout the South. Offering a pow erful emotional 
mess
age and the promise of religious fellowship, revival-
ists attracted both unchurched individuals and pious 
families searching for social ties as they migrated to new 
communities (America Compared, p. 272). 
A New Religious Landscape  The Se cond Great 
Awakening transformed the denominational makeup 
of Ame rican religion. The ma in colonial-period 
churches — the Congregationalists, Episcopalians, and 
Quakers — grew slowly through natural increa se , while 
Methodist and Baptist churches exp anded spectacu-
larly by winning converts. In rural areas, their preach-
ers followed a regular circuit, “riding a hardy pony or 
horse” with their “Bible, hymn-boo k, and Discipline” 
to visit exi sting congregations. The y began new 
churches by searching out devout families, bringing 
them together for worship, and then appointing lay 
elders to le ad t he congregation and enforce moral dis-
cipline. Soon, Baptists and Methodists were the largest 
denominations.
To attract converts, evangelical ministers copied 
the “ practical preaching” te chniques of Ge orge  
Whitefield a nd other e ighteenth-century revivalists 
(Chapter 4). They spoke from memory in plain lan-
guage, raised their voice to make important points, and 
punctuated t heir words with t hea trical gest ures. 
“Preach without papers,” advised one minister. “[S]eem 
earnest & se rious; & you  will be listened t o with 
Patience, & Wonder.”
In the South, evangelical religion was initiall y  a dis-
ruptive force because many ministers spoke of spiritual 
equality and criticized slavery. Husbands and planters 
grew angry when their wives became more assertive 
and when blacks joi ned evangelical congregations. To 
retain white men in their churches, Methodist and 
Baptist preachers g radually ada pted t heir religious 
Anglican/
Episcopalian
Baptist
Catholic
Congregational
Lutheran
Methodist
Presbyterian
2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 12,000 14,000 16,000 18,000 20,000
1860
2,100
12,150
2,500
2,200
2,100
20,000
6,400
47,4501,000
1780
406
457
57
742
240
50
495
2,447
Share of all
congregations (%)
17
19
2
30
10
2
20
4
26
5
5
4
42
14
1780 1860
FIGURE 8.1 
Number of Church Congregations by Denomination, 1780 and 1860
The growth of evangelical churches, Methodist and Baptist, transformed American Christianity 
during the ﬁrst half of the nineteenth century. Also noteworthy was the surge in the number 
of Roman Catholic congregations, the result of Catholic immigration from Ireland and Germany 
after 1830.

272
Black Christianity  Ot her e vangelists persuaded 
planters to spread Protestant Christianity among their 
African American slaves. During the eighteenth cen-
tury, most blacks had maintained the religious prac-
tices of their Afri
can homelands, giving homage to 
message to justify the authority of yeomen patriarchs 
and slave-owning planters. Man was naturally at “the 
head of the woman,” declared one Baptist minister, 
wh
ile a Methodist conference told Christian slaves to 
be “submissive, faithful, and obedient.” 
Frances Trollope
American Camp 
Meetings and English 
Church Hierarchies 
AMERICA  
COMPARED
The critics who have from time to time reproached 
me with undue severity in my strictures on the domestic 
manners of the Americans have said that a candid exami-
nation of matters at home would have sho wn  me that 
what I reprobated might be found in England, as well 
as in the United States. In most cases I have felt that this 
might be rebutted . . . by showing that what I complained 
of in the Union as indicative of imperfect ci vilisation, 
[whereas] if existing at all with us, could only be met 
with among persons in a much lower station of life. . . . 
But on the subject treated in the present chapter, jus-
tice compels me to avo
w that no such pleading can avail 
me. That such fearful profanation of the holy name of reli-
gion has rapidly increased among us since the year 1827, 
in which I quitted England for Ameri ca, is most sadly 
certain. . . . [Y et, the bishops of the Church of England 
protect us from many excesses, while in America the lack 
of an established] national church, and of that guardian 
protectio
n which its episcopal authority seems to promise 
against its desecration by the ever-varying innovations of 
sectarian licence, appeared to account for all the profana-
tions I witnessed.
Source: Frances Trollope, Domestic Manners of the Americans (London: Whittaker, 
Treacher, 1832), 139, 142–144; the material following the asterisks comes from ibid., 
5th ed. (London: R. Bentley, 1839), chapter 8.
I found the opportunity I had long wished for, of attend-
ing a camp-meeting, . . . in a wild district on the confines 
of Indiana. . . .
One of the preachers began in a low nasal tone, and, 
like all other Me
thodist preachers, assured us of the enor-
mous depravity of man as he comes from the hands of 
his Maker, and of his perfect sanctification after he had 
wrestled sufficiently with the Lord. . . . The admiration 
of the crowd was evinced by almost constant cries of 
“A m en! Amen!” “Jesus! Jesus!” “Glory! Glory!” and the 
like. . . . [T]he preacher told them that “this night was 
the time fixed up on for anxious sinners to wrestle with 
the Lord” . . . and that such as needed their help were to 
come forward. . . .
[A]bove a hundred persons, nearly all females, came 
forward, utteri n g howlings and groans, so terrible that 
I shall never cease to shudder when I recall them. They 
appeared to drag each other forward, and on the word 
being given, “let us pray,” they all fell on their knees; but 
this posture was soo
n changed for others that permitted 
greater scope for the convulsive movements of their 
limbs. . . . 
Many of these wretched crea tures were beautiful 
young females. The preachers moved about among them, 
at once exciting and soothing their agonies. . . . I watched 
their tormentors breathing into their ears consolatio n s 
that tinged the pale cheek with red. Had I been a man, 
I am sure I should have been guilty of some rash act of 
interference; nor do I believe that such a scene could have 
been acted in the pres enc e of Englishmen, without instant 
punishment being inflicted . . . to check so turbulent and 
vicious a scene.
* *  **  **
QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS
1. According to Trollope, what accounts for the frequency of 
“profane” religious services in America and their relative 
absence in England?
2. How does Trollope use “social class” to analyze the differ-
ences between England and America? 
Frances Trollope, a successful English author and the mother of novelist Anthony 
Trollope, lived for a time in Cincinnati. She won great acclaim as the author of a 
critical-minded study, Domestic Manners of the Americans (1832), a best-seller in 
Europe and the United States. 

 CHAPTER 8  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820 273
African gods and spirits or practicing Islam. “A t  the 
time I first went to Carolina,” remembered former slave 
Charles Ball, “there were a great many African slaves in 
the country. . . . Many of t hem believed t here were 
several gods [and] I kn ew sev eral . . . Moha
medans.” 
Beginning in the mi d-1780s, Baptist and Methodist 
preachers converted hundreds of African Americans 
along the J ames R iver in Virginia and throughout the 
Chesapeake and the Carolinas.
Subsequently, black Christians adapted Protestant 
teachings to their own needs. They generally ignored 
the doctrines of original sin and Cal vinist predestina-
tion as well as biblical passages that prescribed unthink-
ing obedience to authority. Some Afric an American 
converts envi sioned the Christian God as a warrior 
who had liberated the Jews. Their own “cause  was sim-
ilar to the Israelites,” preacher Martin Prosser told his 
fellow slaves as he and his brother Gabriel plotted 
rebellion in Virginia in 1800. “I have read in my Bible 
where God says, if we worshi p him, . . . five of you 
shall conquer a hun dred a nd a hun dred of you a 
hundred thousand of our enemies.” Confident of a spe-
cial relationship with God, Christian slaves prepared 
them
selves spiritually for emanci-
pation, the first step in their jour-
ney to the Promised Land.
Religion and Reform
Many whites a lso rejected t he 
Calvinists’ emphasis on human depr avity and weak-
ness; instead, they celebrated human reason and free 
will. In New England, educated Congregationalists dis-
carded the mysteri ou s concept of the Trinity — Father, 
Son, and Holy Spirit — and, taking the name Unitarians, 
worshipped a “ united” God and promoted rational 
thought. “The ultimate reliance of a hu man being is, 
and must be, on his ow n  mind,” argued William Ellery 
Channing, a f amous Unitarian minister. A chil dren’s 
catechism conveyed t he deno mination’s optimistic 
message: “If I am good, God will love me, and make me 
happy.”
Other New England Co ngregationalists softened 
Calvinist doctrines. Lyman Beecher, the preeminent 
Congregationalist clergyman, accepted the traditional 
Christian belief that people had a natural tendenc y to 
The Second Great Awakening started in the 1790s as Baptists,
Methodists, and a new sect called Universalists proselytized in
New England.  After 1800 the Awakening continued in Kentucky
in camp meetings of pioneer farmers, who carried evangelical
religion back to their communities.
In the 1820s an intense wave of revivals
ignited religious fervor in communities
along the Erie Canal, and this region became
known as the “burned-over district. ”
As devout farmers moved west,
they established new Protestant
churches throughout the Upper
South and Midwest.
Student revivals at Y ale College and
Andover Seminary around 1800 led
to the expansion of Protestant missions
in the W est and also in Africa, India,
and Hawaii.  Societies supporting the
missions combined into the American
Home Missionary Society in 1826.
Paths of settlement, 1790–1830
Camp meeting, 1801
Kentucky revival
New Y ork’s “burned-over district”
Paths of revival 
0 125 250 kilometers
0 250 miles 125
N
S
EW
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Erie CanalMississippi R.
Ohio R.
Missouri R.
L. Superior
L. M
ichigan
    L. Huron
L. Erie
   
N.Y.
CANADA
Cane
Ridge
Gasper
River
Red River
Andover
New
HavenYale
College
Muddy
River
MICHIGAN
TERRITORY
ILLINOIS
(1818)
INDIANA
(1816)
OHIO
(1803)
KY.
(1792)
TENNESSEE
(1796)
NORTH
CAROLINA
VA.
PA.
VT.
(1791)
N.H.
MAINE
(1820)
MASS.
N.J.
R.I.
CONN.
Andover
Seminary
MAP 8.4 
The Second Great Awakening, 
1790–1860
The Second Great Awakening lasted 
for decades and invigorated churches 
in every part of the nation. The 
revivals in Kentucky and New York 
State were particularly inﬂuential. As 
thousands of farm families migrated 
to the West, they carried with them 
the religious excitement generated by 
the Cane Ridge revival in Kentucky in 
1801. And, between 1825 and 1835, 
the area along the Erie Canal in New 
York witnessed such fervor that it 
came to be known as the Burned-
over District.
COMPARE AND 
CONTRAST
How did evangelical and 
African American churches 
differ from other Protes-
tant denominations? 

274 PART 3  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820
sin; but, rejecting predestination, he affir med t he 
capacity of all men and women to choose Go d. By 
embracing the doc trine of free will, Beecher — along 
with “Free Will” Baptists — testified to the growing 
belief that
 people could shape their destiny.
Reflecting t his optimism, t he Re verend Sam uel 
Hopkins linked individual salvation to religious benev-
olence — the practice of disinterested virtue. As  the 
Presbyterian minister John Rodgers explained, fortu-
nate individuals who had received G od’s grace or 
bounty had a duty “to dole out charity to their poorer 
brothers a nd si sters.” H eeding t his message , pious 
merchants in New York City founded the Humane 
Society a nd other charitable organizations. De vout 
women aided their ministers by holding prayer meet-
ings and di stri bu ting charity. By the 1820s, so many 
Protestant men and women had embraced benevolent 
reform that conservative church leaders warned them 
not to neglect spiritual matters. Still, improving society 
was a key element of the new religio
us sensibility. The 
mark of a true church, declared the devout Christian 
social reformer Lydia Maria Child, is when members’ 
“heads and hearts unite in working for the welfare of 
the human-race.”
Women in the Awakening 
The Second Great Awakening was a pivotal moment in the history of American women. In this detail 
fr
om Religious Camp Meeting, painted by J. Maze Burbank in 1839, male preachers inspire religious 
frenzy, mostly among young women. In fact, most women embraced evangelical Christianity in a calm 
and measured manner, becoming dedicated workers, teachers, and morality-minded mothers. When 
tens of thousands of these women also joined movements for temperance, abolition, and women’s rights, 
they spurred a great wave of social reform. 
Old Dartmouth Historical Society/New Bedford Whaling Museum.

 CHAPTER 8  Creating a Republican Culture, 1790–1820 275
By t he 1820s,  ma ny P rotestant Christians had 
embraced that goal. Unlike the First Great Awakening, 
which split churches into warring factions, the Second 
Great Awakening fostered cooperation among denom-
inations. Religio u s leaders founded five interdenomi-
national s ocieties: t he Americ an Ed ucation S ociety 
(1815), the Bible Society (1816), the Sunday School 
Union (1824), the Tract Society (1825), and the Home 
Missionary Soc i ety (1826). Based in eastern cities — 
New York, Boston, and Philadelphia — these societies 
dispatched hundreds of missionaries to the West and 
distributed thousands of religious pamphlets.
Increasingly, American Prote sta nts saw themselves 
as a movement that could change the course of history. 
“I want to see our state evangelized,” declared a church-
goer near the Erie Canal: “Suppose the great State of 
New York in all its physical, po li tical, moral, commer-
cial, and pecuniary resources should come over to the 
Lord’s side. Why it would turn the scale and could con-
vert the world. I shall have no rest until it is done.”
Because
 the Second Great Awakening aroused such 
enthusiasm, religion became an important new force 
in political life. On July 4, 1827,  the Reverend Ezr a 
Stiles Ely called on the Philadelph i a Presbyterians to 
begin a “Christian party in politics.” Ely’s sermon, “The 
Duty of Christian Freemen to Elect Christian Rulers,” 
proclaimed a religious agenda for the American repub-
lic that
 Thomas Jefferson and John Adams would have 
found strange and troubling. The t wo founders had 
gone to their graves the previous year believing that 
America’s mission was to spread political republican-
ism. In co n trast, Ely urged the United States to become 
an evangelical Christian nation dedicated to religious 
conversion at home and abroad: “All our rulers ought 
in their official capacity to serve the Lord J esus Christ.” 
Evangelical Christians would issue similar calls during 
the Thir d (1880–1900) a nd F ourth (1970–present) 
Great Awakenings.
Women’s New Religious Roles
The upsurge in religious enthusiasm allowed women 
to demonstrate their piety and even to found new 
sects. Mother Ann Lee organized the Shakers in Britain 
and in 1774 migrated to America, where she a tt racted 
numerous recruits; by the 1820s, Shaker communities 
dotted the American countryside from New Hampshire 
to Indiana. Jemima Wilkinson, a young Quaker woman 
in Rhode Island, found inspi r ation by reading George 
Whitefield’s sermons. After experiencing a vision that 
she had died a nd been reincar-
nated as Chri st, W ilkinson 
declared herself t he “Publick  
Universal F riend,” dr essed in 
masculine a tt ire, a nd preached 
a new g ospel. He r tea chings 
blended t he Calvinist warning 
of “a lost a nd guil ty, gossiping, 
dying W orld’’ with Q uaker-inspired plain d ress, 
pacifism, and abolitionism. Wilkinson’s charisma ini-
tiall
y won scores of converts, but her radical lifestyle 
and ambiguous gender aroused hostility, and her sect 
dwindled away. 
A Growing Public Presence  Fema le-led sects had 
far less impact than thousands of women in main-
stream churches. F or e xample, women in New 
Hampshire churches managed more than fifty local 
Mrs. Juliann Jane Tillman, 1844 
In 1837, Mrs. Tillman explained in a newspaper article that 
she “was strangely wr
ought upon” and “went to God” for 
help. Soon, “what seemed to be an angel made his sudden 
appearance, and in his hand was a roll . . . on which was 
written, ‘Thee I have chosen to preach my gospel without 
delay.’” After much anguish and more supernatural visita-
tions, Mrs. Tillman overcame strong personal doubts — and 
the equally strong opposition of male ministers and 
laity — and began to preach in the African Methodist 
Episcopal Church. Library of Congress.
COMPARE AND 
CONTRAST 
How was the Second Great 
Awakening similar to, and 
different from, the First 
Great Awakening of the 
1740s (Chapter 4)? 

276 PART 3  REVOLUTION AND REPUBLICAN CULTURE, 1763–1820
“cent” societies t o raise funds for t he S ociety for 
Promoting Christian Knowledge, New Y ork City 
women founded the Society for the Relief of Poor 
Widows, and young Quaker women in Philadelph i a 
ran the Society for the Free Instruction of African 
Females.
Women t ook charge of religious and charitable 
enterprises because of their exclusion from other pub-
lic roles and because  of their numbers. After 1800, 
more than 70 percent of the members of New England 
Congregational churches were women. The predomi-
nance of women prompted Congregational ministers 
to end traditio
nal gender-segregated prayer meetings, 
and e vangelical Met hodist a nd Baptist preachers 
actively promoted m ixed-sex praying. “Our prayer 
meetings have been one of the grea test means of the 
conversion of souls,” a mini ster in central New York 
reported in the 1820s, “especially those in which broth-
ers and sisters have prayed together.”
Far from lea d ing to sexual promiscuity, as cri tics 
feared, mixing men and women in religious activities 
promoted greater self-discipline. Believing in female 
virtue, young women a nd t he 
men who co ur ted t hem post-
poned se xual intercourse until 
after ma rriage — previously a 
much rarer form of self-restraint. 
In Hingham, Massachusetts, and 
many other New England towns, 
more than 30 p ercent of the women wh o married 
between 1750 a nd 1800 bor e a chil d within e ight 
months of their wedding day; by the 1820s, the rate had 
dropped to 15 percent.
As women claimed spiritual authority, men tried to 
c
urb their power. In both the North and the South, 
evangelical Baptist churches that had once advocated 
spiritual equality now prevented women from voting 
on church matters or offering p ublic test imonies of 
faith. Testimonies by women, one layman declared, 
were “directly opposite to the apostolic command in 
[Corinthians] xiv, 34, 35,  ‘Let your women learn to 
keep silence in the ch urch es.’ ” Another man claimed, 
“Women have a di fferent calling. That they be chaste, 
keepers at home is the Apostle’s direction.” Such injunc-
tions merely changed the focus of women’s religio u s 
activism. Embracing the idea of republican mother-
hood, Christian women throughout the United States 
founded maternal associations to encourage proper 
child rearing. By the 1820s,  Mother’s Magazine and 
other newslet ter s, widely read in hundreds of small 
towns and villages, were g iving women a sen se of 
shared identity and purpose.
Religious activism also advanced female education, 
as churches sponsored academies where girls from the 
middling classes received intellectual a nd m oral 
instru
ction. Emma Willard, the first American advo-
cate of higher ed ucation for women, opened t he 
Middlebury Female Seminary in Vermont in 1814 and 
later founded girls’ academies in Waterford and Troy ,  
New York. Beginning in the 1820s, women educated in 
these semin aries a nd ac ademies di splaced me n as 
public-school teachers, in part because they accepted 
lower pay t han men would. Female s choolteachers 
earned fr
om $12 t o $14 a m onth with room a nd 
board — l ess than a farm laborer. However, as school-
teachers, women had an acknowledged place in public 
life — a stat us that previously had been beyond their 
reach
. Just as the ideology of democratic republicanism 
had expanded voting rights and the political influence 
of ordinary white men in the North, so the values of 
Christian republicanism had bo l stered t he public 
authority of middling women. 
The Second Great Awakening made Americans a 
fervently Protestant people. Along with the values of 
republicanism and capitalism, this religious impulse 
forme d t he core of an emerging national identity.
SUMMARY
Like all important ideologies, republicanism has many 
facets. We have explored three of them in this chapter. 
We sa w how state l egislatures used g overnment-
granted charters and monopolies to support private 
business es , with the goal of enhancing the common-
wealth of society. This republican-inspired “common-
wealth” policy of state me rcantilism remained 
dominant until the 1840s, when classical liberal doc-
tri
nes partially replaced it. 
We also saw how republicanism influenced social 
and family values. The principle of legal eq uality 
encouraged s ocial m obility am ong white me n a nd 
prompted men and women to seek companio nate mar-
riages. Republicanism likewise encouraged parents to 
provide their children with equal inheritances and to 
allow them to choose their marriage partners. In the 
South, rep
ublican d octrines of liberty a nd equality 
coexisted uneasily with racial slavery and class divi-
sions, and ultimately they benefitted only a minority of 
the white population. 
IDENTIFY CAUSES 
Why did Protestant Chris-
tianity and Protestant 
women emerge as forces 
for social change? 

 CHAPTER 8   CHAPTER REVIEW 277
1. How important were the regional differences in 
the s ocial as pects of republicanism, g iven t he 
national scope of other republican-inspired devel-
opments such as state me rcantilism and religio u s 
revivalism? 
2. Trace the relationship between America’s republi-
can culture and the surge of evangelism called the 
Second Great Awakening. In what ways are the 
goals of the two movements similar? How are they 
different?
3. In what ways did women’s private and public lives 
change during the years between 1790 and 1820, 
and what were t he m otive forces behind t hose 
changes?
4. THEMATIC UNDERSTANDING Review t he 
events listed under “W ork, E xchange, a nd 
Technology,” “Ideas, Beliefs, a nd Culture,” a nd 
“Identity” on the thematic timeline on page 149. 
How did the emerging economic and social order 
of early-ninet
eenth-century America represent an 
advance upon, or a retreat from, the republican ide-
ology articulated during the decades of the inde-
pendence struggle?
Answer these questions to demonstrate your 
understanding of the chapter’s main ideas.
REVIEW QUESTIONS 
John Jacob Astor (p. 250)
Benjamin Rush (p. 259)
Henry Clay (p. 267)
Richard Allen (p. 267)
Lyman Beecher (p. 273)
Emma Willard (p. 276)
Key People
“neomercantilist” (p. 250)
Panic of 1819 (p. 251)
Commonwealth System (p. 256)
sentimentalism (p. 258)
companionate marriages (p. 258)
demographic transition (p. 259)
republican motherhood (p. 259)
manumission (p. 265)
herrenvolk republic (p. 266)
American Colonization Society 
(p. 267)
Missouri Compromise (p. 269)
established church (p. 270)
voluntarism (p. 270)
“unchurched” (p. 270)
Second Great Awakening (p. 271)
Key Concepts and Events
Identify and explain the significance of each term below.TERMS TO KNOW
Go to L earningCurve  to retain what you’ve read.MAKE IT STICK
CHAPTER REVIEW
Finally, we observed the complex interaction of 
republicanism and religion. Stirred by republican prin-
ciples, many citizens joined democratic and egalitarian 
denominations, particularly Met hodist a nd Baptist  
churches. I nspired by “ benevolent” ideas a nd t he 
enthusiastic preachers of the Second Great Awakening, 
many women devoted their energies to religious pur-
poses and social reform organiza tions. The result of all 
these initiatives — in economic policy, social relations, 
and religious institutions — w as the creation of a di s-
tinctive American republican culture.